Waddup web warriors,

Hope you've been having a good ~~roller coaster ride~~ week of web dev. If there was ever a time to take a vacation from tech news... it was this one 😅

But we're not here for drama, we're here for learning! There's enough happening that I'm expanding the usual "here's some video links" rhythm to updates from my corner of the industry. If you like this format, consider **forwarding this email** around the webiverse :)

## Jamstack, Tanstack, everywhere a stack stack 🎵

I was lucky enough to join Netlify's Jamstack Conf in person this year. I was so humbled [to introduce my whiteboard to my jam fam heros](https://twitter.com/BHolmesDev/status/1590551196141760513?s=20&t=XO4WHChiA_VOUOcQnf-gHA), and to talk shop with some static site nerds :)

### An enterTaning announcement

First takeaway I want to share: [**Tanstack router is a big deal.**](https://github.com/TanStack/router) Speaking with Tanner, this is the most robust, type-safe, framework-agnostic SPA solution for anyone _really_ building web _apps ™️_. I'm talking **dashboards, internal tools, data viz,** anything else JS-heavy.

[I've been playing with config-based SPAs inside of Astro](https://twitter.com/BHolmesDev/status/1582726860646993920?s=20&t=Xf7iXjjg7S-fW8kfVVAwew) for server-side rendering. [With Ryan "Solid" Carniato jumping in on the perf discussion](https://twitter.com/t3dotgg/status/1590221121877864448?s=20&t=Xf7iXjjg7S-fW8kfVVAwew), Tanstack Router could be the perfect base for building web Apps-with-a-capital-A 👀

### Cache is temporary, static is forever

Second callout: **history is repeating itself with serverless deploys, and we need to learn from past mistakes.**

I was humbled to chat with Matt Biilmann (CEO of Netlify) about my experiments with serverless + cache headers inside of Astro. This turned into a nuanced discussion on how serverless + long-lasting cache headers doesn't always = static HTML builds.

Matt brings a decade+ of server deploy experience, and a Jamstack legacy born from the dark PHP ages, so this was quite the learning experience for me. To hit the tip of the SSR iceberg:
- Bad `?query` params and cookie headers can bust your serverless caches if not properly handled
- Every deployment host, _and_ every web browser, handles cache headers _just_ a bit differently. And none are fully compliant with the web standard ([see comparison chart](https://cache-tests.fyi/)).
- Static assets are cheap, portable, and easy to rollback ([thanks for the summary Zach L 🙌](https://twitter.com/zachleat/status/1586014416725680129)). Serverless caching can come close, but never perfectly match a plain ole HTML file.

Remember that cache headers are imperfect, and the spec's unlikely to change anytime soon. This is why static site generators with client-side fetching was all-the-rage as websites grew more dynamic.

Sure, Edge compute may almost remove the need for caching entirely as request times and hosting costs race to the bottom. But with today's tech, if you're eying shiny new SSR frameworks... static will never be a bad bet.

---

## Speaking of caching...

This week in #WhiteboardTheWeb was all about the "new wave" of dynamic sites. Vercel is betting on server caching with NextJS 13, following in Remix and Astro SSR's footsteps. Let's talk about what this means for Next, and how you can cache with confidence.

- [**💰 Cache serverless responses with Cache-Control headers -**](https://wtw.dev/59) With serverless on the rise, cache is king. To speed up responses and cut down on your server bill, let’s walk through Cache-Control headers that’ll fine-tune how and where cache is stored.

- [**🧠 NextJS 13 chooses static vs. dynamic deploys… for you? -**](https://wtw.dev/58) Did you know NextJS 13 flips between static and serverless deploys based on _how you write you code?_ Let’s seen how Next snoops on your fetch functions to auto-decide the best way to ship your website.

---

## What I'm listening to 🎧

It's been a while since I dropped a song rec in here! This week, I want to shout out [a crazy future-funk tack](https://open.spotify.com/track/7rTxLYlqDyXRtz6wpx9zc8?si=b8b7ecb46bb44475) from ev.exi. I've been deep in the funk and vaporwave genres for a while, and ev.exi is easily the most innovative producer out there. If you need something to get you in the groove, this is the bop for you.

And that's about it! Stay verified, |USER.NAME| ✌️